DOC-753 | Graph ML UI (#709)
arangodb/docs-hugo: site/content/3.13/data-science/arangographml/ui.md

---
title: GraphML
menuTitle: GraphML
weight: 15
description: >-
 Enterprise-ready, graph-powered machine learning as a cloud service or self-managed
aliases:

>   - getting-started-with-arangographml

Author: I have removed the `aliases` section from the `ui.md` file, including the alias `getting-started-with-arangographml`

---
Solve high-computational graph problems with Graph Machine Learning. Apply ML on a selected graph to predict connections, get better product recommendations, classify nodes, and perform node embeddings. Configure and run the whole machine learning flow entirely in the web interface.

## What You Can Do with GraphML

GraphML directly supports two primary machine learning tasks:

*   **Node Classification:** Automatically assign a category or label to nodes in your graph. For example, you can classify customers as "likely to churn" or "high value," or identify fraudulent transactions.

> *   **Node Embeddings:** Generate powerful numerical representations (vectors) for each node. These embeddings capture a node's features as well as its unique structural position within the graph.

Author: you were right, focusing on similarity makes the definition much clearer and more accurate. I've rewritten the section as you recommended.

While not a direct one-click option, these embeddings unlock more advanced applications like **link prediction** or **recommendation engines**. By comparing the embeddings of two nodes, you can calculate their similarity to predict the likelihood of a connection. This is the foundation for recommending products to users or suggesting new friendships in a social network.

## How ArangoGraphML Works

> The underlying framework for ArangoGraphML is **GraphSAGE**. GraphSAGE (Graph Sample and AggreGatE) is a powerful Graph Neural Network (GNN) designed for inductive representation learning on large graphs. It is used to generate low-dimensional vector representations for nodes, and is especially useful for graphs that have rich node attribute information. The overall process involves two main stages:

Author: Yes, it's a good idea to provide a link to GraphSAGE. Based on my understanding, it is a Graph Neural Network (GNN).

*   **Dangling Edges**: Edges that point to non-existent vertices ("dangling edges") are not caught during the featurization analysis. They may cause errors later, during the Training phase.
*   **Prediction Scope**: Predictions can only be run in batches on the graph. It is not possible to request a prediction for a single document on-the-fly (Example, via an AQL query).
*   **Memory Usage**: Both featurization and training can be memory-intensive. Out-of-memory errors can occur on large graphs with insufficient system resources.

## The GraphML Workflow

The entire process is organized into sequential steps within a **Project**, giving you a clear path from data to prediction:

1.  **Featurization:** Select your data and convert it into numerical features.
2.  **Training:** Train a GraphSAGE model on the features and graph structure.
3.  **Model Selection:** Evaluate the trained models and choose the best one.
4.  **Prediction:** Use the selected model to generate predictions on your data.
5.  **Scheduling (Optional):** Automate the prediction process to run at regular intervals.

## Creating a GraphML Project

> To create a new GraphML project using the ArangoDB Web Interface, follow these steps:

Reviewer: Do we need to distinguish between platform and core web interface?

1. From the left-hand sidebar, select the database where you want to create the project.

> 2. In the left-hand navigation menu, click **Data Science Suite** to open the GraphML project management interface, then click Run GraphML.

Reviewer: The term "Data Science Suite" needs to be replaced with "GenAI Suite".
As "Run GraphML" is a UI label, it should be written in bold.

   ![Navigate to Data Science](../../../images/datascience-intro.jpg)  
3. In the **GraphML projects** view, click  **Add new project**.
4. The **Create ML project** modal opens. Enter a **Name** for your machine learning project.
5. Click the **Create project** button to finalize the creation.

> 6. After creation, the new project appears in the list under GraphML projects. Click the project Name to begin with a Featurization job.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. After creation, the new project appears in the list under **GraphML projects**. Click the project name to begin with a Featurization job.
```

## Featurization Phase

After clicking on a project name, you are taken to a screen where you can configure and start a new Featurization job. Follow these steps:
- **Select a Graph** – In the **Features** section, choose your target graph from the **Select a graph** dropdown.
- **Choose Vertex Collections** – Pick the vertex collections that you want to include for feature extraction.

> - **Select Attributes** – From the dropdown, choose the attributes from your vertex collection to convert into machine-understandable features. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Select Attributes** – Choose the attributes from your vertex collection to convert into machine-understandable features. 
```

{{< info >}}

> Attributes cannot be used if their values are lists or arrays.

Reviewer: They are the same in AQL/ArangoDB Core, I'm not sure if this refers to Python or some other environment where there is a difference? One for mixed types and another where each element is of the same type??

As there is another admonition following right after, maybe put this as a regular sentence at the end of the previous bullet point?

{{< /info >}}

{{< info >}}
A metagraph is basically just the configured subset of a graph (the vertex and edge collections and the specified attributes). This is what you see represented in the metagraph object in the JSON specification on the right.
{{< /info >}}

The featurization process has several configurable options, grouped into Configuration and Advanced settings. These are also shown in a JSON format on the right side of the screen for transparency.

**Configuration**

> These settings control the overall featurization job and how features are stored.

Reviewer: No blank line between these two means the bold text and the following line will render with only a space between them

**Feature Storage Options**
These settings control where the generated features are stored.

- **Overwrite FS graph** – Whether to overwrite the Feature Store graph if features were previously generated. Default is `false`, therefore features are written to an existing graph Featere store graph.
- **Write to source graph** – Whether to store the generated features on the Source Graph. Default is `true`.
- **Use feature store** – Enable the use of the Feature Store database, which allows you to store features separately from your Source Database. Default is `false`, therefore feature are written to the source graph.

**Advanced Settings: Handling Imperfect Data**

Real-world data is often messy. It can have missing values or mismatched data types. This section allows you to define default rules for how the featurization process should handle these data quality issues for each feature type, preventing the job from failing unexpectedly.

For each feature type (Text, Numeric, Category, and Label), you can set two types of strategies:

**Missing Strategy:** Defines what to do when an attribute is completely missing from a document.

> **Mismatch Strategy:** Defines what to do when an attribute exists but has the wrong data type.

Reviewer: This should be an unordered list

**Missing Value Strategies**

**Raise:** The job immediately stops and reports an error if a data type mismatch is found. Use this when any type mismatch indicates a critical data error.

> **Replace:** Replaces a missing value with a default you provide (e.g., 0 for numbers, "unknown" for text). The job then continues. Use this when missing values are expected.

Reviewer: This should be an unordered list

**Mismatch Value Strategies**

**Raise:** The strictest option. The job will immediately stop and report an error if a data type mismatch is found. Use this when any type mismatch indicates a critical data error.

**Replace:** If a mismatch is found, the system immediately replaces the value with the default you specify, without attempting to convert it first. Use this when you don't trust the mismatched data and prefer to substitute it directly.

**Coerce and raise:** A balanced approach. The system first tries to convert (coerce) the value to the correct type (e.g., string "123" to number 123). If the conversion is successful, it uses the new value. If it fails, the job stops. This is often the best default strategy.

> **Coerce and replace:** The most forgiving option. The system first tries to convert the value. If the conversion fails, it replaces the value with the default you specify and continues the job. Use this for very "dirty" datasets where completing the job is the highest priority.

Reviewer: This should be an unordered list

> Once all selections are done, click the **Begin featurization** button. This will trigger a **node embedding-compatible featurization job**.Once the job status changes to **"Ready for training"**, you can start the **ML Training** step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once all selections are done, click the **Begin featurization** button. This triggers a **node embedding-compatible featurization job**. Once the job status changes to **Ready for training**, you can start the **ML Training** step.
```

![Navigate to Featurization](../../../images/graph-ml-ui-featurization.png) 

## Training Phase

> This is the second step in the ML workflow after featurization. In the training phase, you configure and launch a machine learning training job on your graph data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The training is the second step in the ML workflow after featurization. In the training phase, you configure and launch a machine learning training job on your graph data.
```

- **Data Load Parallelism:** The number of parallel processes used when loading data from ArangoDB into memory for trainnig. (Example, 10)

After setting these values, click the **Begin training** button to start the job.

![Node Classification](../../../images/ml-nodeclassification.png)

 ####  Node Embedding

Node Embedding is used to generate vector embeddings (dense numerical representations) of graph nodes that capture structural and feature-based information.

**Use cases include:**
- Similarity search (Example, finding similar products, users, or documents)
- Link prediction (Example, suggesting new connections)

**Configuration Parameters:**
- **Type of Training Job:** Node embeddings
- **Target Vertex Collection:** Select the collection to generate embeddings for (Example, `movie` or `person`)
- No label is required for training in this mode

Once the configuration is complete, click **Begin training** to launch the embedding job.

![Node Embeddings](../../../images/ml-node-embedding.png)

After training is complete, the next step in the ArangoGraphML workflow is **Model Selection**.

## Model Selection Phase

> Once the training is finished, the job status updates to READY FOR MODEL SELECTION. This means the model has been trained using the provided vertex and edge data and is now ready for evaluation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the training is finished, the job status updates to **READY FOR MODEL SELECTION**. This means the model has been trained using the provided vertex and edge data and is now ready for evaluation.
```

**Understanding Vertex Collections:**

**X Vertex Collection:** These are the source nodes used during training. They represent the full set of nodes on which features were computed (Example, person, movie).

> **Y Vertex Collection:** These are the target nodes that contain labeled data. The labels in this collection are used to supervise the training process and are the basis for evaluating prediction quality.

Reviewer: I only see X and Y mentioned in the tooltip?

> The target collection is where the model’s predictions will be stored once prediction is executed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The target collection is where the model's predictions are stored when running a prediction job.
```

> **Model Selection Interface:**

Reviewer: There is no mention here or above about the **Go to Model Selection** button

> A list of trained models is displayed, along with performance metrics such as accuracy, Precision, Recall, F1 score, Loss.            

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A list of trained models is displayed, along with performance metrics (Accuracy, Precision, Recall, F1 score, Loss).
```
Should the Matrix button be also mentioned and explained?

Review the results of different model runs and configurations.

Select the best performing model suitable for your prediction task.

![Model Selection](../../../images/graph-ml-model.png)

## Prediction Phase

> After selecting a model, you can create a Prediction Job. The Prediction Job generates predictions and persists them to the source graph, either in a new collection or within the source documents.

Reviewer: Does this change the graph definition or include a new collection?

### Overview

The Prediction interface allows inference to be run using the selected model. It enables configuration of how predictions are executed, which collections are involved, and whether new or outdated documents should be automatically featurized before prediction.

You have two important options for this:

**Featurize new documents:** Enable this option to generate features for documents that have been added since the model was trained. This is useful for getting predictions on new data without having to retrain the model.

> **Featurize outdated documents:** Enable this option to re-generate features for documents that have been modified since the last featurization. This ensures your predictions reflect the latest changes to your data.

Reviewer: Should be an unordered list

> In addition to these settings, you will also define the target data, where to store results, and whether to run the job on a recurring schedule.

Reviewer: Should be an unordered list

> In addition to these settings, you also define the target data, where to store results, and whether to run the job on a recurring schedule.

Reviewer: Should have an internal link to the scheduling details

![prediction phase](../../../images/graph-prediction.png)

### Configuration Options
The Prediction screen displays the following configuration options:

- Selected Model: Displays the model selected during the Model Selection phase. This model will be used to perform inference.

- Target Vertex Collection: This is the vertex collection on which predictions are applied.

- Prediction Type: Depending on the training job (for example, classification or embedding), the prediction outputs class labels or updated embeddings.

### Featurization Settings
Two toggles are available to control automatic featurization during prediction

**Featurize New Documents:**
This option controls whether newly added documents are automatically featurized. It is useful when new data arrives after training, allowing predictions to continue without requiring a full retraining process.

**Featurize Outdated Documents:**

> Enable or disable the featurization of outdated documents. Outdated documents are those whose attributes (used during featurization) have changed since the last feature computation. This ensures prediction results are based on up-to-date information.

Reviewer: This is already described above
